It's strange to see that so many centuries
after the persecution of Galileo the basic
concept of the heliocentric universe... sorry...
the heliocentric model of the solar system
is still controversial, and we have loud,
angry voices, on the internet, that are debating
whether the universe should be regarded as
geocentric or otherwise.
What I find hilarious in this is that neither
the Christians nor the atheists are being
honest about what the matter is to be debated.
Whether you regard it as being about religion,
or tradition, or history, or science, it is
not enough to only scrutinize skeptically
the positive scientific argument for how the
solar system works.
It's a point that's actually of great historical
significance and even literary and symbolic
interest in understanding how the English
language evolved to look at what the Bible
does say, sincerely and with detachment, about
what the shape of the universe is.
Why is it that we all grow up with these romantic
and poetic terms for the sky as "the heavens",
as being "the vault of the heavens", "the
heavenly firmament".
We've at least seen that in Shakespeare, even
if you had a totally secular upbringing, and
if you had a religious upbringing you probably
read those words in the Bible without really
thinking about what they meant or why they
were used instead of clearer and more sensible
words, and possibly your family discouraged
you from asking hard questions.
"Firm", why does the idea of "firmness" appear
within "firmament"?
I think, in general, as history went on, Bible
translators tried to be as poetic and vague
as possible in letting you know what the shape
of the world really was in most-ancient Judaism,
preserved in and re-articulated in Christian
tradition.
Going back to the 14th century, the John Wycliffe
translation of the Bible, and his so-called
"first translation", [reads:] "the firmament
be made in the midst of the waters, and part
the waters from the waters".
The ancient Jewish view of the world (in first
temple Judaism) is that the ocean exists above
the sky, as well as below and surrounding
the ground that we're standing on, and that
when god created the world, he created the
vault of the heavens.
The firmament [is supposed to be] a solid
material for the sky, so that the air we're
breathing is a bubble, with an ocean above
it, as well as an ocean below it.
It's a view of the world that is totally surreal
and magical, from a modern perspective.
It isn't a competitor with or an alternative
to the heliocentric view of the universe.
It's not as if one is a model of an atom that
has the neutron in the middle, and the other
one has electrons in the middle, no, there's
absolutely no comparison.
To use a totally modern, western translation,
the New International Version of the Bible
for the same passage says, "Let there be a
vault between the waters to separate water
from water".
Okay, the water above the "vault" of the heavens,
and the water below.
That's how god supposedly created the universe.
And in the later Wycliffe translation, going
back again to the 14th century, he was already
starting to become a little bit more poetic
in rephrasing this: "Be made a firmament in
the middle of waters, and divide it, waters
from waters".
Okay?
If we're comparing the scientific model of
the solar system to the Biblical model of
the solar system we're comparing something
that makes sense to something that looks like
a Christmas snow-globe, except the water is
on the outside, the air is on the inside,
and we have to imagine the sun and the moon
being much smaller than the earth, not larger,
and as being nestled inside that bubble (that
god created for you to breathe in).
When you know that, all kinds of things make
sense, not just in reading the Bible, but
also reading Christian-influenced western
literature from Shakespeare's poetry on down.
That's all I got for you, folks.
If you want to be a skeptic, it doesn't just
mean "question the value of scientific claims",
it also means that you look skeptically at
the world's history, philosophy, language
and literature, with the same kind of detachment
that, uh, we supposedly or hopefully ascribe
to scientific process.